Comparison between Kyma Telemetry Operator and FluentBit Operator (#581)
kyma-project/community: internal/proposals/logs/dynamic-backend-configuration/fluentbit-operator.md

| Add support for [throttle filter plugin](https://docs.fluentbit.io/manual/pipeline/filters/throttle).|  | Implemented. |
| Add runtimeClassName support to FluentBit CRD. | (Not needed for our usecase, not quite sure) | Not implemented. Needs to be adapted in FluentBit Chart if wanted. |
| Support setting imagePullSecrets for both [operator](https://github.com/fluent/fluentbit-operator/pull/93/files) and [fluentbit](https://github.com/fluent/fluentbit-operator/pull/94/files) | Nice to have. | Not implemented.
| Add switch to input.tail.memBufLimit in helm chart |  | Implemented. |
| Add [fluent-bit-watcher](https://github.com/fluent/fluentbit-operator/pull/62/files). | Watches for new fluent-bit config changes. Restarts fluent-bit process instead of pod to apply config. This way the fluent-bit pod needn't be restarted to reload the new config. The fluent-bit config is reloaded in this way because there is no reload interface in fluent-bit itself. |

**Enhancements:**

> * Use hostpath instead of emptydir to store position db #72

Author: Numbers have been removed 👍🏻

Passing sensitive info as Secrets | Not implemented | SecretReferences can be passed. SecretReference is a pointer to a Kubernetes secret that should be provided as environment to Fluent Bit.
Rollback | Not implemented | Not implemented
Input, Filter, and Output support | Not all features of inputs, filters, and outputs are supported. But it seems since the acquision they are adding more and more. | All official inputs, filters, and outputs are supported. **But** we do not want that the user is able to create new inputs, creating inputs will be restricted (not implemented until now).
Customization | Custom Fluent Bit parser plugins supported. Inputs, filters, and outputs are planned to be supported | No custom Fluentd plugins supported, user needs to forward the logs using a custom output to another log processor.
| Daemonset Management | The Daemonset definition is managed by the operator, incl. potential migration logic | Daemonset will only be restarted but the actual definition is un-managed |

# Chances and Risks

## Chances Fluent-Bit Operator

> * Going with the Fluent-Bit operator will allow Kyma to **save investment** and maintenance. The logging configuration will be changeable at runtime without being forced to touch the fluent-bit system parts (main goal of the story). Furthermore it will maintain the Daemonset and might reduce **maintenace efforts on upgrades**.
> * Furthermore, users will use **well known resource definitions** for the configuration with existing documentation (to be proven) and an existing community behind.
> * The software will be **battle proven** and mostly likely will have a higher quality then a custom solution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Going with the Fluent-Bit operator will allow Kyma to **save investment** and maintenance. The logging configuration will be changeable at runtime without being forced to touch the fluent-bit system parts (main goal of the story). Furthermore it will maintain the Daemonset and might **reduce maintenance efforts on upgrades**.
* Furthermore, users will use **well known resource definitions** for the configuration with existing documentation (to be proven) and an existing community behind.
* The software will be **battle proven** and mostly likely will have a higher quality than a custom solution.
```

* Furthermore, the FluentBit Operator **lacks important features** (secret injection, config check, bad config rollback, etc.), on which no concrete plans are published. Adding these features will require cooperation with the project and potential investments **-> Strategic risk**
* The operator is too early (no stable release even), it is not obvious if it will find adoption and the project will have an active community long-term **-> Strategic risk**
* An external component will bring maintenance efforts, the image must be hardened and often even duplicated to keep it clean from known vulnerabilities. Furthermore bugs must be fixed/workarounded on an external codebase. **-> Investment risk**
* Having a custom operator to keep the independence in the user-facing interface and additional have the advantage of the fluent-bit operator as internal mechanism will increase the dependencies heavy, and adds another component to maintain from all kind of aspects like for example security scanning.

## Chances custom operator

> * The custom operator will be written as part of the kyma team and will be in full control, especially it's interface can be designed so that it fits 100% into the usage scenarios. Furthermore, it must not be specific to the logging scenario, it can be extended to any other observability related usage and has the chance of providing an unified and consistent approach to the users.

Author: ```suggestion
* The custom operator will be written as part of the kyma team and will be in full control, especially it's interface can be designed so that it fits 100% into the usage scenarios. Furthermore, it does not have to be specific to the logging scenario, it can be extended to any other observability related usage and has the chance of providing an unified and consistent approach to the users.
```
